We're going to talk about  a
We're going to talk about a
a protocol upgrade that we're pushing
for  next week  that is around
for next week that is around
fixing a bug that was discovered last
week. So  last month we pushed out
week. So last month we pushed out
whisk which is protocol 23 protocol
was upgraded by a vote from  tier one
was upgraded by a vote from tier one
validators.  and  on Thursday last
validators. and on Thursday last
week, a week ago, we  discovered a bug
week, a week ago, we discovered a bug
in the protocol.  we've  we worked
in the protocol. we've we worked
the following two days on containing the
bug.  which affected  state
bug. which affected state
archival.  so basically some small
archival. so basically some small
number of ledger entries  that were
number of ledger entries that were
archived were archived with the wrong
version. So the not most recent version
and when they were restored  the
and when they were restored the
restoration allowed for the non-most
recent  version to be restored.  the
recent version to be restored. the
total  number that was actually
total number that was actually
affected is  less than 500 ledger
affected is less than 500 ledger
entries. 478 to be exact.  out of
entries. 478 to be exact. out of
these  only 84 were restored.  so
these only 84 were restored. so
these are ledger entries  that were
these are ledger entries that were
actually  restored to the Navos recent
actually restored to the Navos recent
value.  last week, Thursday, Friday,
value. last week, Thursday, Friday,
we worked with  tier one validators to
we worked with tier one validators to
contain this issue, which means that
we've
set out an emergency SLP to  avoid
set out an emergency SLP to avoid
archiving more u  more ledger entries.
archiving more u more ledger entries.
We also manually bumped all entries
on the network that were about to expire
so that they don't.
we then  issued a  released a new
we then issued a released a new
version of stellar core that was patched
in order to ensure that  the affected
in order to ensure that the affected
ledger entries cannot be touched so that
any state inconsistencies remain
quarantined.
that happened last week on Friday and
from that moment on we've been working
for the past week  since Friday night
for the past week since Friday night
on  on  communicating with
on on communicating with
validators and with affected protocols
to understand what the extent of  of
to understand what the extent of of
their issue was.  we've also
their issue was. we've also
suggested a few  protocol
suggested a few protocol
upgrade options in order to
rectify this.  and the protocol option
rectify this. and the protocol option
that is  overwhelmingly the most
that is overwhelmingly the most
popular is the less intrusive one which
is to  obviously fix the bug to  fix
is to obviously fix the bug to fix
the archive. So all the ledger entries
that were archived and not restored will
be  will be fixed in the archive and
be will be fixed in the archive and
so when they're restored they will be
restored to the correct  value.  but
restored to the correct value. but
with regards to the ledger entries that
are live and have been restored
incorrectly  we will not be addressing
incorrectly we will not be addressing
them on the protocol level  but we
them on the protocol level but we
have ensured with all  affected
have ensured with all affected
issuers and protocols that we've been
communicating with. we're talking about
around 20 protocols.  that they do
around 20 protocols. that they do
have ways  to rectify this on their
have ways to rectify this on their
end.  so for  some issuers, it just
end. so for some issuers, it just
means that  they need to adjust the
means that they need to adjust the
supply to make sure that it's   it
supply to make sure that it's it
reflects what's on chain.  a lot of
reflects what's on chain. a lot of
the issues  a lot of the state
the issues a lot of the state
changes have actually been  benign and
changes have actually been benign and
not had any meaningful impact. , and
some protocols have had ways to , kind
of like upgrade out of these issues.
, and so I am going to stop talking
for a bit right now and , happy to ,
take any questions. Justin, did you guys
hear all this?
>> , yes. It sounded great. And right now
I'm just going to paste the blog post
that we just  released that explains
that we just released that explains
this a little bit in the  chat over
this a little bit in the chat over
here. So if you want to sort of read a
version of what Tor said, it's there.
we also you'll see that there's a link
to a cap there.  the cap is is the
to a cap there. the cap is is the
suggested change that Tor was talking
about and I think  I think Nico is
about and I think I think Nico is
here and will join us on stage in a
minute to talk through the cap.  but
minute to talk through the cap. but
first there is a question from Jome.
This was completely random. So some
entries were correctly archived and
restored.
>> it's not random in the sense that
>> it's not random in the sense that
this was not  arbitrary. It was
this was not arbitrary. It was
deterministic in the sense that all
protocols  all validators actually
protocols all validators actually
behaved  exactly the same. So the
behaved exactly the same. So the
network  did not fork  based on this
network did not fork based on this
behavior.  it was consistent.  but
behavior. it was consistent. but
it required a very kind of like
specific arbitrary chain of events that
relate to how  whisk handles  live
relate to how whisk handles live
state prioritization between  the
state prioritization between the
bucket list which includes all the live
states and  the evicted state.  so
states and the evicted state. so
not random  but definitely  also not
not random but definitely also not
trivial to identify.
Does that answer your question?
Okay, it looks like it looks like there
are
I mean I see someone saying I am late.
How bad is this? As Tor pointed out and
you can read that blog post that's
posted above, this bug was discovered by
Elliot friend who's here on this
call.  who's who is a senior developer
call. who's who is a senior developer
advocate at the Stellar Development
Foundation and he discovered it while he
was you know doing some work to get
ready for a hackathon that's coming up
and you know short it did not take long
at all and you can see the timeline
there for there to be  for the the
there for there to be for the the
issue to be very quickly quarantined and
the  fix will be rolled out pretty
the fix will be rolled out pretty
soon. So, while it's a bug that, you
know, is very it's a serious bug. The
impact is something that we've like
evaluated, talk to everyone who's been
impacted about and, you know, it's it's
definitely contained at this point. ,
so I'll let you read the post and decide
how bad it is. , but my answer is I
think that the response has kept it
pretty contained and has cut it off very
quickly.  but
quickly. but
the other so at this point  we have
the other so at this point we have
I'm going to post here this is cap
yeah and as as Dimma points out above
I mean you can read what he he wrote in
response to your question too.
So, I know there's a lot of of  of
So, I know there's a lot of of of
discussion going on, but at this point,
I also think it's important to take this
opportunity to look at the proposed
solution, which is what I just pasted
there. It's a core advancement proposal
76.
And we have some people from the core
team to walk through this. , Nico, do
you want to do it or or is it better if
Dimma does it?
>> I can I can Yeah. take a first stab at
it.
guess hear me? Okay,
>> perfect.
>> All right. So yeah, so like at a high
level what the cap is describing is
first what is actually in scope  for
first what is actually in scope for
the  to to kind of mitigate this
the to to kind of mitigate this
problem. So like Toma was explaining
earlier there there's actually  two
earlier there there's actually two
types of entries that  that u that
types of entries that that u that
were corrupted.
they both started in the same way
where they basically entries got moved
from the live ledger state into the
archive and during that process
entries got corrupted
and then after that some of those got
restored and  at that point they were
restored and at that point they were
restored for all sorts of purpose. It
could be  for just  reading them
could be for just reading them
like a  you know a lot of entries on
like a you know a lot of entries on
on in Sorban are just accessed  for
on in Sorban are just accessed for
for reads  like a WAM for example is
for reads like a WAM for example is
an example of that.  others were also
an example of that. others were also
accessed for modification.
and  yeah but what what the cap is
and yeah but what what the cap is
is  putting in scope is the only
is putting in scope is the only
the first category of of entry. So
basically the ones that were moved into
the archived and kind of stayed there.
and
the  the solution as part of this is
the the solution as part of this is
is  is to basically go and
is is to basically go and
take the value  that was supposed to
take the value that was supposed to
be in the archive  and then override
be in the archive and then override
the  the archive with that expected
the the archive with that expected
value. So the fix itself sounds fairly
fairly simple. U because it is the u the
bit the the bit of a challenging part
here is  how can you all of you guys
here is how can you all of you guys
can trust us that this is the right list
and  there's actually quite a bit of
and there's actually quite a bit of
work that went into this  in in the
work that went into this in in the
the cap. So the there's a full list of
of basically of  in a CSV file
of basically of in a CSV file
that you will find  where you will see
that you will find where you will see
for each of those entries that end up in
the archive we have the  ledger number
the archive we have the ledger number
where  when the  the entry got moved
where when the the entry got moved
into the archive corrupted like I said.
So in that case we actually have in this
CSV the the value of the of the entry as
it was at the moment it was about to get
moved. And then we also have in the same
row  like the value that  of the
row like the value that of the
corrupted u entry and  and then what
corrupted u entry and and then what
happens when we  when we are going to
happens when we when we are going to
u follow the this cap right is the
core is going to to scan those entries
one by one and see the ones that match
the corrupted state in the archive and
then if the if it's if it's there it
should be  because we
should be because we
also froze  restoration at this point.
also froze restoration at this point.
then the  the value will get
then the the value will get
replaced by what it should have been. So
that's kind of like like the  the
that's kind of like like the the
first part I guess of  of this fix.
first part I guess of of this fix.
there's another one that's this one is
actually related to this  second
actually related to this second
set of entries that actually got
restored.  that's for the total lumen
restored. that's for the total lumen
supply.  they were about I think it's
supply. they were about I think it's
like three lumen around that like of
accounting discrepancy. So in the
proposal what we are saying is that well
some lumen got  got burned in during
some lumen got got burned in during
this event
we're going to just kind of for
accounting purpose  move that burn as
accounting purpose move that burn as
a into the fee pool. So that's kind of
what the mitigation is  for for that.
what the mitigation is for for that.
So in terms of like the
the  like I said like the so this is
the like I said like the so this is
the CSV CSV file what the what core is
going to do as part of like
in terms of like actual steps right
to to restore the entries in the archive
to the right value
in terms of like verification. So
there like a few things  that can be
there like a few things that can be
done. There's first  there's the list
done. There's first there's the list
itself.  this one was  computed
itself. this one was computed
by instrumenting core and replay
all those events that are around
eviction.
the version of core that will go out
with the protocol change will will have
this instrumentation
and  better than that actually it will
and better than that actually it will
also have a  a way to basically use
also have a a way to basically use
that CSV file and check that  the
that CSV file and check that the
modification those  those changes are
modification those those changes are
the only changes  that happened in the
the only changes that happened in the
in that time period. So it's kind of a
double  you know double double use in
double you know double double use in
a way where the CSV file you can use it
first to see what is the full list of of
impacted entries to also see which ones
will be restored and  you can also use
will be restored and you can also use
that as a way to understand that what
will happen with protocol 24 and also
which one which of those entries
will will not be impacted by this
protocol. upgrade in which case they
will stay  corrupted as they are today
will stay corrupted as they are today
on the So those are like the entries
that are in  yeah that got restored so
that are in yeah that got restored so
those are like live entries
so maybe I should stop here for a bit
see if there are like specific questions
I just want to add one thing because I
got some questions on this earlier today
the the patched version of core that
is currently in production by tier one
validators  bans every transaction
validators bans every transaction
that tries to touch  any of the state
that tries to touch any of the state
that's been corrupted. That's those 87
ledger entries.  so if for some reason
ledger entries. so if for some reason
anyone on this call or anyone you're
talking to is  unable to  get a
talking to is unable to get a
transaction in  and and is getting a
transaction in and and is getting a
timeout because of   just getting
timeout because of just getting
timeout then  this might be because
timeout then this might be because
you're trying to touch  that state.
you're trying to touch that state.
and part of  protocol 24 is removing
and part of protocol 24 is removing
that ban. So, that ban is supposed to be
removed as soon as the protocol  is in
removed as soon as the protocol is in
effect.  which is right now
effect. which is right now
scheduled for Wednesday  next week
scheduled for Wednesday next week
5:00 p.m. EDC.
>> And again, that's a small number small
number of ledger entries, right?
>> Yeah. Just for just for context,
>> Yeah. Just for just for context,
you know, ledger Stellar is a database.
you can  you know think of these
you can you know think of these
ledger entries as row rows  in the
ledger entries as row rows in the
database.  and Stellar has around 47
database. and Stellar has around 47
million  rows in this database.  out
million rows in this database. out
of which  80  87  have these
of which 80 87 have these
issues.
>> There's a question will protocol 24
contain new ZK features? No.  the the
contain new ZK features? No. the the
features that were planned for the ZK
features that were planned for protocol
24 will now be pushed to the next
protocol. Protocol 24  is
protocol. Protocol 24 is
just a stability upgrade.
Mootz has a question to clarify this cap
focuses on managing the existing
corrupted entries. Was there a
cap/update that could be shared that
addresses the root cause of generating
corrupted entries?
Yes.  definitely this  protocol 24
Yes. definitely this protocol 24
will fix the debug.  yeah, actually I
will fix the debug. yeah, actually I
I thought we included the fix itself in
the  the cap. So if we didn't, I'm
the the cap. So if we didn't, I'm
sorry about that. But yeah, it should be
there.
Yeah,
like we could add it to the cap for
posterity. Like we typically don't
include bug fixes in the cup because
it's like two lines fix and  you do
it's like two lines fix and you do
not do anything new from the protocol
standpoint.
Like you already have a cap defined for
this feature. The issue is not the
protocol but the issue is that
implementation was incorrect. But the
cap itself is cap 62 I believe.  so
cap itself is cap 62 I believe. so
you know we got added to the cap like
that we also fixing the bug but it's not
that historic historically done for the
bug fixes.
Sorry about that.
Does that make sense to you?
Of course, I asked as several people are
typing.
Just to confirm, will this require a
network pause? No.
I see there are some questions about the
features that were planned for protocol
24 that will now be for protocol 25. If
you scroll up and you grab that cap, you
can actually look at the different
proposals for things that relate to ZK
features. And I think you can dig into
those. But for now, I think we should
kind of keep this focused on the on the
current situation,
the current upgrade
because I think it's also important. ,
I mean, Nico, you sort of talked through
a lot of this, but can you just tell us
what happens next?
So in terms of  you mean like
So in terms of you mean like
implementation so and and all this. So
like  the team already has been
like the team already has been
very busy  actually implementing this
very busy actually implementing this
u this protocol change.
given the yeah the urgency of getting
this  voted as  you know as soon as
this voted as you know as soon as
possible so that we can you know like
like Toma was saying part of this is
also allows the the network to to to
unblock those  those entries as
unblock those those entries as
well. So yeah it's a it's there are many
reasons that why we want this to to
happen as quickly as possible.  the
happen as quickly as possible. the
so yeah in terms of next step what's
going to happen is that so we are
going to have builds of stellar core and
the the rest of the like platform type
of software that depends directly on
stellar core released by
>> that's like Horizon RPC galaxy.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And then those will be
released by Monday.  and then  what
released by Monday. and then what
we expect to do is  Tuesday will be
we expect to do is Tuesday will be
the test net upgrade to this new
protocol
and then we'll get the  the vote to
and then we'll get the the vote to
with with the validators to be scheduled
on Wednesday and  hopefully given that
on Wednesday and hopefully given that
we did a lot of work already with with
those validators the vote will actually
be  approved and meaning that  we'll
be approved and meaning that we'll
be back in in business  in general
be back in in business in general
at that time
>> and so just in general to prepare if
people run infrastructure that basically
has stellar core embedded in it so
either stellar core for a validator or
those things that are on the platform
side that Nico mentioned RPC horizon
galaxy
you'll need to upgrade right before the
test net if you want to your
infrastructure to work on test net and
before the mainet floats. That means you
have to like pick up the fixes, the the
new releases on Monday. But unlike other
protocol protocol upgrades, this doesn't
require everyone to install new SDKs.
Correct.
>> That's correct. Yeah. It's only
there's no impact to the  XDR in
there's no impact to the XDR in
particular. And because of that, that
means that applications
in general don't actually need to
to do anything. It's basically like
about picking up the It's already about
picking up the right version of core at
this point.
The reason we have to upgrade  systems
The reason we have to upgrade systems
like RPC  and Horizon is because
like RPC and Horizon is because
there's actually a check in the those
systems that  that check that the
systems that that check that the
protocol version
that core is  that the network is
that core is that the network is
running on. So in this case it will you
know after the vote it will switch to
24.
so like the systems are actually
built with a safety in place that they
will only ingest data from a protocol
that they understand.  and so
that they understand. and so
basically this is this constant and
that's the only  that's the only
that's the only that's the only
change really in those downstream
systems.
>> I'd like to answer Adam's question.
>> I'd like to answer Adam's question.
so Adam asked if a reserve asset
is added to the pool  they are tokens
is added to the pool they are tokens
created inside the contract it won't
require a deposit of the actual assets
to reconcile.  so we did have  a few
to reconcile. so we did have a few
of these ledger entries ended up being
ledger entries that relate to  to
ledger entries that relate to to
liquidity pools.  and the remediation
liquidity pools. and the remediation
u is a bit different between different
pools and different assets.  so for
pools and different assets. so for
some assets  that  changed
some assets that changed
imbalance  if they have a centralized
imbalance if they have a centralized
issuer it was fairly  simple to
issuer it was fairly simple to
basically add  the backing asset
basically add the backing asset
and and offchain so that they can
reconcile  the issue.  in some
reconcile the issue. in some
other situations it was it was
almost trivial to to burn  if if there
almost trivial to to burn if if there
was a eronous  credit  for  some
was a eronous credit for some
pools some liquidity pools are sorry are
implemented in different ways.  so for
implemented in different ways. so for
example  the Aquarius pool is
example the Aquarius pool is
implemented in a way in which
actually adding an asset  doesn't
actually adding an asset doesn't
change  the price or anything because
change the price or anything because
Aquarius has like internal tracking of
the of the reserves and so manually
adding a reserve doesn't actually
impact price and and and that added
balance is is unusable.  it's not it's
balance is is unusable. it's not it's
not like that for for source swap and so
it's really different assets and
different protocols  like found
different protocols like found
different ways to fix it.  but again
different ways to fix it. but again
we've talked to pretty much every
affected  protocol and issuer  and
affected protocol and issuer and
ensured that all of them  have ways to
ensured that all of them have ways to
fix the situation in the context of
these  77 ledger entries. Sorry, I
these 77 ledger entries. Sorry, I
said the wrong number before. It's 77,
not 87.
and I can't stress enough how
helpful every  protocol and asset
helpful every protocol and asset
issuer have been. , I think we started
reaching out Friday night and Saturday
morning and we've and everyone has been
extremely
understanding and and collaborative
and and it's awesome to see the
ecosystem come together like this.
I see there's still some people typing
in the chat. ,
if the questions wind down is I think a
lot of it's just  sort of comments.
lot of it's just sort of comments.
I'd say if you have a question, get it
in now.
It's telling me orbit lens has a
question, but Orbit asked, "Do we need
to update the RPCs as well?"  and
to update the RPCs as well?" and
George from the platform team said yes.
>> Yes.
>> Yeah.
Is there a technical reason this must be
a protocol version upgrade instead of a
patch release?
Well, yes. , like it's a it's a it's
an update to the ledger and because of
that it has to happen basically on all
machines at once. It was going to be
like a patch release. , yeah, we would
only be able to kind of the the change
would happen basically on like whatever
machine is running right on that with
that patch version.
Is this recorded for playback, Carsten?
Yes, correct.
Yeah, I would say in general if you know
you have further questions or it's a
good idea to read that blog. It just
came out I think an hour ago, maybe even
less. And also to read the the CAP. ,
and in general, I think if you're
interested in in these kinds of issues,
make sure that you pay attention here or
sign up for the Stellar Dev mailing
list. Make sure that you pay attention
to the caps. , we do try to be as
transparent about any of these changes
as possible. And obviously we you know
through all of this we we not only
couldn't make a decision without all the
feedback from the ecosystem about what
to implement but implementation is just
one step in governance and the actual
adoption of a protocol change on the
network requires validators to vote it
in. So in all of this we we always are
trying to talk to people including you
know this call but also online and
various other platforms and we're trying
to like put the work out there in a
place where you can examine it and
understand it and we certainly encourage
you to do that. In fact, with the CAP,
there's a whole process for core
advancement proposals and  as part of
advancement proposals and as part of
it, we put them into final comment
period. And because of the urgency here,
we just fast forwarded this to  final
we just fast forwarded this to final
comment period.  and so it's it's
comment period. and so it's it's
going to stay in final comment period,
which means that you can write about it
on on the Stellar Dev mailing list until
the time that the validator vote
happens, which should be on Wednesday.
So, this cap is officially in final
comment period. You know, we definitely
urge you to take a look if you have
anything to say to add it.
Orbit is pointing out the short
timeline.
Yeah, it is a short timeline. I agree.
, yeah, like
the  reason we
the reason we
we are still kind we think this is best
for the ecosystem is that we are
actually giving at this point like
yeah like a you know almost a week
notice that this is coming. So the
people should be able to to prepare
ahead of  you know and allocate those
ahead of you know and allocate those
two days for upgrading their
infrastructure.
I think given the the severity of
of having those  those entries
of having those those entries
blocked  I think this is the probably
blocked I think this is the probably
the right trade-off.
Nico,
>> can you what will the experience be like
for somebody that needs to upgrade their
RPC?
Will it be difficult?
>> So like Yeah. No to upgrade this is
basically  just like doing a a regular
basically just like doing a a regular
kind of a software package update. U
there's  really no other steps to
there's really no other steps to
take.  and for people that don't I
take. and for people that don't I
think you mentioned that earlier the
this  that core instance will  will
this that core instance will will
will get stuck until u until the package
gets updated.
It's not going to do like some strange
things. It's just going to to
Anyone
else have a question
or anything to add?
I think there were question I saw a
question that I don't think we we can
really answer to that directly like
on potential impact of like for specific
protocols. I think  yeah th those
protocols. I think yeah th those
those  need to be  answered by
those need to be answered by
those protocols themselves.
Like the assessment, you know, that we
got from from basically everyone at this
point is that  people are going to be
point is that people are going to be
able to mitigate  for the most part
able to mitigate for the most part
the the impact of this corruption.
I think Elliot that the answer
to Your question is what Nico just gave.
Well, I'll give it a few more minutes
for some of these comments or questions
to come in.
Anyone
know where the bug came from slash how
it got in?
>> I mean like bugs or bugs. Yeah, it's
>> I mean like bugs or bugs. Yeah, it's
kind of a they're always sad.  what I
kind of a they're always sad. what I
can say is that yeah we had multiple
rounds of code review. We had
Well,
feel a little bit more typing.
It seems to be witicisms more than
questions.
Thank you for being so responsive to fix
the issue. That's  that's really nice.
the issue. That's that's really nice.
Yes. Again, I also want to say echo what
Tor said before. This has been like a
really cool moment where
a lot of engineers at SDF, but also a
lot of people in the ecosystem have
really stood up and provided
information, given opinions, given
feedback, reviewed data, done their own
analysis. And so this is like, you know,
for what it's worth, it really does show
that there is just an ability to be
super responsive in general across the
ecosystem.
Yeah, if you're not following over there
there in the cap, there's actually a
list CSV file that has all the different
columns that got restored. So, you can
actually look at all the restored
entries. ,
yeah.
Or you can do some stuff with the RPC.
Look at that. We're learning here and
sharpening our honing our chops.
Yeah, that's correct. Right now, all you
will get is a timeout from if you try to
interact with one of those entries.
I see somebody said and may maybe this
was a joke. I can't tell. It says or
not, I guess there's no way to tell. So,
this isn't going to cause Stellar to
fork.
No, this Well, I that's a tricky
construction because there's a negative
in there. , this will not cause
Stellar to fork.
That's my statement.
I'm trying to even think through how how
it possibly would. I I don't I can't
even picture how it might
Yeah, again the the the important I mean
the place where we are right now like
the issue was identified
the functionality was turned off
impacted ledger entries were temporarily
quarantined
fix will basically
allow them to be uncaranted. and and
allow the any of the ledger entries that
are currently archived when they get
restored they'll be restored correctly I
believe is is where we're at but again
all of that is is an implementation
based on feedback from the ecosystem it
actually requires validator validator
ascent through a programmatic vote on
the network to go live and take effect.
It looks like Adam was experiencing a
timeout message
to save you from yourself.
Okay, cool. I feel like we're winding
down. ,
and again, , some takeaways, read the
blog, read the cap caps and final
comment period, join the stellar dev
mailing list if you want to leave a
comment. Look at that thread that
persists about the issue. If you have
questions or an experience that you want
to share,
we will try to keep you updated as new
things happen.  again we have sort of
things happen. again we have sort of
it seems like there is social consensus
on a path forward for a fix which is
what is  captured in that cap.  as
what is captured in that cap. as
the stellar core team implements a
solution and it becomes available we
will let you know and shortly thereafter
we will try to upgrade the network. To
orbit's point it's a very short time
frame for that to happen. So, we're
starting to talk to people now to let
them know, but once this all the
software is released, the actual upgrade
process from a from an operational point
of view should be pretty
straightforward. , so yeah, I I really
appreciate you all for joining this and
maybe under different circumstances we
can just hang and chat again sometime.
This was nice.
Thank you all.